{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24\qc 
{\plain \fs24 \b General Discussion}{\plain \fs24 \par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 Models are becoming increasingly useful tools for psychologists. They help us make sense out of \softline
mounds of data, provide insights and new conceptual understanding, and they can even point the \softline
way in a research program. To use them most productively, we need to understand their behavior \softline
at a level of granularity that matches what is generated in experiments, namely qualitative \softline
differences among conditions. PSP was developed with this goal in mind. A model{\u8217\'92}s ability to \softline
mimic human behavior is evaulated in the context of the other data patterns that it can generate in \softline
an experimental design, thereby providing a rich context in which to understand what it means \softline
for a model to account for an experimental finding. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 The three example application in this paper were meant to demonstrate some of the uses of this \softline
versatile tool. In the case of ALCOVE, PSP assisted in evaluating the model{\u8217\'92}s soundness in \softline
capturing an empirical result. At a qualitative level, the PSP analysis supplies the same \softline
information about behavior found in LMA, that the model can mimic human performance. Much \softline
more importantly, by studying the partitioned parameter space, we learn how representative this \softline
behavior is of the model and how many other data patterns the model can produce. Some of these \softline
might be plausible alternative response patterns. Others might occupy such a small region in the \softline
parameter space that they should be considered spurious and  uncharacteristic of the model.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 In the second and third examples, PSP was used to study the behavioral consequences of slight \softline
design differences between two localist connectionist models, Merge and TRACE. To do this, \softline
data patterns and their corresponding volumes in parameter space were compared across models \softline
in two experimental settings that were intended to highlight design differences. Many more \softline
similarities than differences were were found in classification behavior. RT analyses of the \softline
region occupied by the empirical data led to the same conclusion. Qualitatively, TRACE and \softline
Merge were indistinguishable. Only in the volume analyses did differences emerge. These took \softline
the form of biases in emphasizing some data patterns over others. The volume of the empirical \softline
region can be interpreted as reflecting how well the model accounts for the result. By this \softline
measure, TRACE does the better job with the subcategorical mismatch data, and Merge with the \softline
indirect inhibition data.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Although one might not be surprised by the models{\u8217\'92} similarities, the PSP anaysis provides the \softline
evidence to support such a claim. Furthermore, the analyses suggest how difficult it might be to \softline
find a situation in which they make different qualitative predictions. However, PSP might be just \softline
the tool to assist in this endevour, by enabling the researcher to essentially pretest an experiment \softline
to learn whether it could discriminate between the models. Once an experiment is designed, the \softline
models can be run through the PSP algorithm to determine which data patterns are shared and \softline
unique. To the extent that  participants are likely to produce those in the latter category, the \softline
experiment has the potential to discriminate between the models.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Of course, the meaningfulness of any such analysis depends on how a data pattern is defined. \softline
Conclusions may be specific to a definition, which is why it can be worthwhile to use more than \softline
one, as was done when comparing TRACE and Merge. Because ordinal predictions dominate in \softline
most experimental work, the task of defining a data pattern is relatively straight forward. Indeed, \softline
this is in part what makes PSP widely applicable. It does not depend on quantitive fits. Another 
reason PSP is applicable to a wide range of models is because of how the model interfaces with \softline
the the algorithm itself. In a sense, the model is just a module in the algorithm, which makes it \softline
possible to insert models of almost any type, be they algebraic, algorithmic, connectionist, etc. \softline
Indeed, this feature of the algorithm makes it possible to compare models across these types, \softline
something that in the past has been difficult to do. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 PSP can also be of considerable use in model development by making the modeler aware of the \softline
broader consequences of the design choices made in model creation. For example, there may be \softline
four key experimental results that any model of categorizatoin must capture to be taken seriously. \softline
By running the algorithm in each experimental setting, a comprehensive analysis of the model{\u8217\'92}s \softline
design can be undertaken. Desirable and undesirable behaviors can be readily identified. The \softline
centrality of the human pattern(s) can be assessed. The model can then be modified on the basis \softline
of this knowledge and the entire process repeated. From successive iterations, one can develop a \softline
clear understanding of how or whether parameters contribute to model behavior, such as whether \softline
there are redundancies across paramters, the appropriateness of their ranges, and even optimal \softline
values.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Figure 15 provides a glimpse of what can be learned. Shown are distributions of parameter \softline
values for three of TRACE{\u8217\'92}s parameters that were obtained within the empirical region of the \softline
parameter space in the indirect inhibition experiment (no BUP). Each distribution contains \softline
10,000 values and gives a sense of how the parameter contributes in capturing the experimental \softline
result. For the phoneme excitation parameter, the distribution of possible values is fairly broad, \softline
although there is a clear optimum. The phoneme-to-word excitation parameter is much more \softline
tightly constrained, so much so that one might wonder whether its range should cut in half, from \softline
0 to 0.5. The distribution for the phoneme-to-phoneme inhibition parameter is essentially flat, \softline
suggesting a high degree of context sensitivity, which goes along with Norris et al{\u8217\'92}s (2000) \softline
observations about the stability of indirect inhibition. Although insights such as these can \softline
sometimes be garnered after extensive experience with a model, PSP analyses not only confirm \softline
these intuitions, but also expose their extent as well as introduce the modeler to additional \softline
tendencies and behaviors that might not be anticipated.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}\pard \fs24\qc 
{\plain \fs24 }{\plain \fs24 \i Figure 15 here}{\plain \fs24 \par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Our analyses in the three applications focused on the regions in the parameter space that generate \softline
valid data patterns, those that meet the decision threshold. The invalid regions of the space can be \softline
of interest in some circumstances, such as during model development. Analysis of these regions \softline
might also be useful for model comparison. For example, models{\u8217\'92} likeness or distinctiveness \softline
might be further confirmed by comparing patterns in these regions.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Throughout the paper, the global perspective on model behavior that PSP provides has been \softline
examined from the standpoint of the model to determine its flexibility or scope (Cutting, 2000). \softline
It can be equally productive to view the situation from the vantage point of the experiment, by \softline
asking how much the experiment is likely to challenge the model. To the extent that it will, the \softline
experiment has the potential to be a good, meaningful test of the model. In this regard, one lesson \softline
that comes out of our applications of PSP is that the fewer the number of conditions and the 
fewer the possible relationships between them, the less informative the test may be.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Because PSP is a search problem, it is subject to many of the same difficulties found in nonlinear \softline
function optimization and integration, which work under a set of regularity conditions about the \softline
target function, such as continuity, smoothness, stationarity, existence of a solution within a finite \softline
limit and so on.}{\plain \fs24  For this reason, the algorithm is currently limited in scope. For example, a \softline
probabilistic (e.g., stochastic) model can be analyzed by PSP only if its simulational component \softline
can be replaced with a closed-form probability density function. Another requirement is that the \softline
range of parameters must be finite. If some unconstrained parameters are unavoidable (i.e., \softline
plausible data patterns could still be generated from their extreme values), it is recommended to \softline
reparameterize the model utilizing log, inverse logistic, or other transformations.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 As currently implemented, volume estimation of a region is performed using a multi-dimensional \softline
ellipsoid. This is satisfactory for models that generate regions that are not oddly shaped (sharply \softline
bowed) or discontinuous. Exploratory work ensured that these conditions were satisfied for the \softline
current simulations. However, the algorithm would be more powerful, precise, and useful were it \softline
could be applied to these situations. Work is underway to extend its capabilities.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Another obviouls extension of PSP is to continuous value data. [Jay, finish this paragraph]\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 In sum, PSP fills a void in the arsenal of tools available for studying the behavior of \softline
computational models. It is intended to complement local approaches by focusing on the global \softline
behavior of the model while at the same time operating at the qualitative level of description and \softline
prediction found in most experimental work. The wealth of information that can be learned with \softline
the tool is enormous, as the examples presented here attest, and bodes well for its successful \softline
application in other modeling domains and content areas.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}}