{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b PARAMETER SPACE PARTITIONING (OR BEYOND GOODNESS OF FIT)}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 The experimental method of scientific inquiry has proven to work quite well in psychology, \softline
perhaps too well. Its unique blend of methodological control and statistical inference are effective \softline
for testing qualitative (i.e., ordinal) predictions derived from theories of behavior. Data collection \softline
and dissemination have become very efficient, so much so that far more may be known about \softline
behavioral phenomena than is reflected in theory.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 That our knowledge extends beyond the reach of the theory may be a sign of productive science, \softline
and underscores the fact that theories are broad conceptualizations about behavior that cannot be \softline
expected to explain the minutia in data. Cognitive modeling is a research tool that can act as a \softline
counter-force to slow or eliminate this explanatory gap. It compensates for a theory{\u8217\'92}s limitations \softline
of precision in data synthesis, description, and prediction. Whether the model is an \softline
implementation of an existing theory, or a neurally inspired environment is created in which to \softline
study processing (e.g., information integration, representational specificity, probabilistic \softline
learning), models are rich sources of ideas and information on how to think about perception and \softline
cognition. The pros and cons of various implementations can be evaluated. Inconsistencies and \softline
hidden assumptions can come to light during model creation and evaluation. In short, the \softline
modeler is forced to confront the complexity of what is being modeled, and in the process, can \softline
gain insight into the relationship between variables and the functionality of the model (see \softline
Shiffrin & Nobel, 1998 for a personal account of this process).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Of course, the virtues of modeling are accompanied by vices. One of the more serious, frequently \softline
leveled against connectionist models (Dawson & Shamanski, 1994; McCloskey, 1991), is that \softline
model behavior can be mysterious and difficult if not impossible to understand, which defeats the \softline
purpose of modeling. A model should not be as (or more) complex than the data being described. \softline
Rather, models should offer a simpler description, one that essentially compresses experimental \softline
data.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 The preceding observations are not so much a comment about models or modeling per se, but a \softline
comment about the need for methods for analyzing model behavior. The computational power \softline
and precision of cognitive models requires correspondingly sophisticated tools to study them. \softline
The dearth of such tools may diminish the contribution of modeling to psychology and can also \softline
be an impediment to productive model development. The wide variety of models in the discipline \softline
makes the need for universal tools more pressing and all the more challenging. In this paper, we \softline
introduce a general-purpose model analysis and comparison method in the context of \softline
connectionist models (distributed and localist). Before describing it, current methods are \softline
reviewed.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}\pard \fs24\qc 
{\plain \fs24 }{\plain \fs24 \b General Discussion}{\plain \fs24 \par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 Models are becoming increasingly useful tools for psychologists. They help us make sense out of 
mounds of data, provide insights and new conceptual understanding, and they can even point the \softline
way on how to proceed next in a research program. To use them most productively, we need to \softline
understand their behavior.  PSP was developed with this goal in mind. A model{\u8217\'92}s ability to \softline
mimic human data is evaulated in the context of the other data patterns that it can generate in an \softline
experimental design, thereby providing a richer context in which to understand what it means for \softline
a model to account for an experimental finding. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 The two examples of its application in this paper were meant to demonstrate some of the uses of \softline
this versatile tool. In the case of ALCOVE, PSP was used as described above, to evaluate the \softline
model{\u8217\'92}s soundness in capturing an empirical result. One of the pieces of information that the PSP \softline
analysis supplies which is also obtained with methods of local model analysis, is that the model \softline
performs like humans, learning the classification tasks in a specific order. Much more \softline
importantly, by studying the partitioned parameter space, we learn how representative this \softline
behavior is of the model and how many other data patterns the model can produce in the \softline
experiemntal design. Some of these might be plausible alternative response patterns. Others \softline
might occupy such a small region in the parameter space that they should be considered spurious \softline
and  uncharacteristic of the model.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 The global perspective on model behavior that PSP provides allows one to learn the scope of a \softline
model, the extent to which it generates other data patterns, in an experimental setting. This \softline
relationship between a model and the experimental setting can also be viewed from the opposite \softline
vantage point by asking how much the experiment is likely to tap the limits of the model. To the \softline
extent that it does, the experiment has the potential to generate informative results. One lesson \softline
that comes out of the two applications of PSP here is that the fewwer the number of conditions, \softline
and the fewer the possible relationships between them, the less informative the test may be.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 In the second example, PSP was used to study the behavioral consequences of slight design \softline
differences between two localist connectionist models, Merge and TRACE. To do this, data \softline
patterns and their corresponding volumes in parameter space were compared across models in \softline
two experimental settings that were intended to bring out design differences. Many more \softline
similarities than differences were were found in classification behavior. RT analyses of the \softline
region occupied by the empirical data led to the same conclusion. Qualitatively, TRACE and \softline
Merge were indistinguishable. Only in the volume analyses were differences found. These took \softline
form of biases in emphasizing some data patterns over others. If the volume of the empirical \softline
region is taken as the degree of support for a model, then TRACE seemed better suited to \softline
capturing the subcategorical mismatch data and Merge the indirect inhibition data.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Although one might not be surprised by the models{\u8217\'92} similarities, the PSP anaysis provides the \softline
evidence to support such a claim. Furthermore, they suggest how difficult it might be to find a \softline
situation in which they make different qualitative predictions, the primary yardstick used to \softline
evaluated such models. However, PSP might be just the tool to assist in this endevour, by \softline
enabling the researcher to essentially pretest an experiment to learn whether it could discriminate \softline
between the models. Once an experiment is designed, the models can be run through the PSP \softline
algorithm to determine which data patterns are shared and unique. To the extent that  participants \softline
are likely to produce those in the latter category, the experiment has the potential to discriminate 
between the models.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Of course, the meaningfulness of any such analysis depends on how a data pattern is defined. \softline
Conclusions may be specific to a definition, which is why it can be worthwhile to use more than \softline
one, as was done when comparing TRACE and Merge. Because ordinal predictions dominate in \softline
most experimental work, the task of defining a data pattern is relatively straight forward. Indeed, \softline
this is in part what makes PSP widely applicable. It does not depend on the model being able to \softline
fit the data quantitively. Another reason PSP is applicable to a wide range of models is because \softline
of how the model interfaces with the the algorithm. In a sense, the model is just a module in the \softline
algorithm, which makes it possible to insert models of almost any type, be they algebraic, \softline
algorithmic, connectionist, etc. Indeed, this feature of the algorithm makes it possible to compare \softline
models across these types, something that can be quite difficult to do. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 PSP can also be of considerable use in model development by making the modeler aware of the \softline
broader consequences of the design choices made in model creation. For example, there may be \softline
four key experimental results that any model of categorizatoin must capture to be taken seriously. \softline
By running the algorithm in each experimental setting, a comprehensive analysis of the model{\u8217\'92}s \softline
desing can be undertaken. Desirable and undesirable behaviors can be readily identified. The \softline
centrality of the human pattern(s) can be assessed. The model can then be modified on the basis \softline
of this knowledge and the entire process repeated. From successive iterations, one can develop a \softline
clear understanding of how or whether parameters contribute to model behavior, such as whether \softline
there are redundancies across paramters, the appropriateness of their ranges, and even optimal \softline
values.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Figure 15 provides a glimpse of what can be learned. Shown are distributions of parameter \softline
values for three of TRACE{\u8217\'92}s parameters that were obtained within the empirical region of the \softline
parameter space in the indirect inhibition experiment (weak threshold, no BUP). Each \softline
distribution contains 10,000 values and gives a sense of how the parameter contributes in \softline
capturing the experimental result. For the phoneme excitation parameter, the distribution of \softline
possible values is fairly broad, although there is a clear optimum. The phoneme-to-word \softline
excitation parameter is much more tightly constrained, so much so that one might wonder \softline
whether its range should be reduced to 0 to 0.5. The distribution for the phoneme-to-phoneme \softline
inhibition parameter is essentially flat, suggesting a high degree of context sensitivity. Although \softline
insights such as these can sometimes be garnered after extensive experience with a model, PSP \softline
analyses not only confirm these intuitions, but also expose their extent, as well as introduce the \softline
modeler to additional tendencies and behaviors that might not be anticipated.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}\pard \fs24\qc 
{\plain \fs24 }{\plain \fs24 \i Figure 15 here}{\plain \fs24 \par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Throughout the paper, our focus has been on the region of the parameter space that generates \softline
valid data patterns, those that meet the decision threshold. The invalid regions of the space can be \softline
of interest in some circumstances, such as during model development. Analysis of these regions \softline
might also be useful for model comparison. For example, their likeness or distinctiveness might \softline
be further confirmed by comparing patterns in these regions and their volumes.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Because PSP is a search problem, it is subject to many of the same difficulties found in nonlinear \softline
function optimization and integration, which work under a set of regularity conditions about the \softline
target function, such as continuity, smoothness, stationarity, existence of a solution within a finite \softline
limit and so on.}{\plain \fs24  For this reason, the algorithm is currently limited in scope. For example, a \softline
probabilistic (e.g., stochastic) model can be analyzed by PSP only if its simulational component \softline
can be replaced with a closed-form probability density function. Another requirement is that the \softline
range of parameters must be finite. If some unconstrained parameters are unavoidable (i.e., \softline
plausible data patterns could still be generated from their extreme values), it is recommended to \softline
reparameterize the model utilizing log, inverse logistic, or other transformations.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 As currently implemented, volume estimation of a region is performed using a multi-dimensional \softline
ellipsoid. This is satisfactory for models that generate regions that are not oddly shaped (sharply \softline
bowed) or discontinuous. Exploratory work ensured that these conditions were satisfied for the \softline
current simulations. However, the algorithm would be more powerful, precise, and useful were it \softline
could be applied to these situations. Work is underway to extend its capabilities.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Another obviouls extension of PSP is to continuous value data. [Jay, finish this paragraph]\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 In sum, PSP is a tool for studying the behavior of computational models. It goes beyond \softline
traditional approaches such as goodness-of-fit by focusing on the global behavior of the model in \softline
an entire experimental setting, not just its local behavior in the region occuppied by empirical \softline
data. In doing so, PSP analyses generate a wealth of information about model behavior (e.g., \softline
number, types, and typicality of data patterns). The examples presented here demonstrate the \softline
methods potential as well as the global approach to model analysis. Our hope is that PSP \softline
becomes a standard tool in the modeler{\u8217\'92}s workbench.}}