{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset161 \fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
Dunn and James{\u8217\'92} (2003) signed difference analysis (SDA) is another example of GMA. SDA is a \softline
method of identifying all ordinal relationships between task performance measurements (e.g., \softline
response time, percent correct) a model allows by varying its parameter values. The ordinal \softline
predictions are derived under the presumption that performance measurement is a monotonic \softline
function of model parameters or a combination of parameters. As a concrete example, consider a \softline
model that postulates that response time and percent correct in a hypothetical experiment are \softline
both monotonically related to an underlying psychological construct represented by parameter {\f1\u952\'e8}. \softline
Suppose further, that the experiment includes two stimulus conditions, each associated with a \softline
different value of the parameter. According to this model, the performance measurements are \softline
modeled by the following equations: {\plain \fs24 RT}{\plain \fs24 \sub i}{\plain \fs24  = f({\f1\u952\'e8}}{\plain \fs24 \sub i}{\plain \fs24 ) and PC}{\plain \fs24 \sub i}{\plain \fs24  = g({\f1\u952\'e8}}{\plain \fs24 \sub i}{\plain \fs24 ), i = 1,2, for two monotonically \softline
increasing functions, f and g. It is then easy to show that the model permits ordinal relationships \softline
\{RT}{\plain \fs24 \sub 1}{\plain \fs24  > RT}{\plain \fs24 \sub 2}{\plain \fs24  & PC}{\plain \fs24 \sub 1}{\plain \fs24  > PC}{\plain \fs24 \sub 2}{\plain \fs24 \} and \{RT}{\plain \fs24 \sub 1}{\plain \fs24  < RT}{\plain \fs24 \sub 2}{\plain \fs24  & PC}{\plain \fs24 \sub 1}{\plain \fs24  < PC}{\plain \fs24 \sub 2}{\plain \fs24 \} but does not permit \{RT}{\plain \fs24 \sub 1}{\plain \fs24  > RT}{\plain \fs24 \sub 2}{\plain \fs24  & PC}{\plain \fs24 \sub 1}{\plain \fs24  \softline
< PC}{\plain \fs24 \sub 2}{\plain \fs24 \} or \{RT}{\plain \fs24 \sub 1}{\plain \fs24  < RT}{\plain \fs24 \sub 2}{\plain \fs24  & PC}{\plain \fs24 \sub 1}{\plain \fs24  > PC}{\plain \fs24 \sub 2}{\plain \fs24 \} for any values of the parameter. Accordingly, an \softline
observation of either of the latter two relationships would falsify the model. Note that SDA does \softline
not require one to estimate model parameters or to specify the forms of the monotone functions. \softline
In short, SDA offer a simple means of testing models based solely on their qualitative \softline
characteristics. One drawback of SDA is that the method is based on the unrealistic premise of \softline
error-free measurement. Obviously, this diminishes interpretability of SDA results for error-prone data; further work on statistical treatment of SDA is clearly needed. \par
}}